The lactose uptake-pathway of E. coli is a paradigmatic example of multistability in gene-regulatory circuits.
In the induced state of the lac-pathway, the genes comprising the lac-operon are transcribed, leading to the
production of proteins which import and metabolize lactose. In the uninduced state, a stable repressor-DNA loop
frequently blocks the transcription of the lac-genes. Transitions from one phenotypic state to the other are driven
by fluctuations, which arise from the random timing of the binding of ligands and proteins. This stochasticity
affects transcription and translation, and ultimately molecular copy numbers. Our aim is to understand the
transition from the induced to the uninduced state of the lac-operon. We use a detailed computational model
to show that repressor-operator binding/unbinding, fluctuations in the total number of repressors, and inducerrepressor binding/unbinding all play a role in this transition. Based on the timescales on which these processes
operate, we construct a minimal model of the transition to the uninduced state and compare the results with
simulations and experimental observations. The induced state turns out to be very stable, with a transition rate
to the uninduced state lower than 2 × 10−9
per minute. In contrast to the transition to the induced state, the
transition to the uninduced state is well described in terms of a 2D diffusive system crossing a barrier, with the
diffusion rates emerging from a model of repressor unbinding.
Introduction
Multistable gene regulatory circuits play an important role
in diverse biological processes like embryo development [1,
2], viral reproduction [3, 4], and nutrient uptake in bacteria [5, 6]. Despite the term “multistable”, regulatory circuits
are never truly multistable, as transitions from one phenotypic state to another occur due to random fluctuations: The
processes involved in gene expression regulation (changes in
operator state, transcription, and translation) are intrinsically
stochastic, as is ligand binding. Another source of stochasticity affecting molecular copy numbers is cell division, leading
to the random partitioning of molecules in the two daughter
cells. These fluctuations can take the system from one (longlived) phenotypic state to another. The particular fluctuations
driving a phenotypic transition vary from system to system.
For instance, the transition to competence in B. subtilis is
driven by fluctuations in the numbers of the ComK protein [7],
while in the arabinose uptake pathway it is entirely driven by
the initial distribution of pump proteins in the cell [5].
In this paper we focus on the lactose uptake pathway
(lac-pathway), which has been studied extensively since the
1960s [6, 8–16]. Following early discoveries by Jacob and
Monod [8], and Novick and Weiner [9], the lac-pathway
has become a paradigmatic system for study of gene regulation [13, 14]. The last decade has seen renewed interest in the
lac-pathway due to its multistability, that is the ability of the
pathway to sustain different concentrations of a particular protein (or sets of proteins) for long times [6, 10–12, 15, 16]. The
induced and uninduced states define two distinct phenotypes
differing in their lactose uptake. The induced state persists
due to feedback; the more lactose is present in the cell, the
more lac-repressors have a reduced affinity for the lac regulatory region and the more pumps are produced and import
further lactose. Nevertheless, the number of pumps fluctuates
stochastically and will (with a small probability per unit time)
cross a threshold to the uninduced state.
In previous work, we have combined a detailed mechanistic
model of the lac-pathway with flow-cytometry experiments to
understand the transition from the uninduced to the induced
state [15]. We found that this transition occurs when the lacrepressor unbinds from the lac regulatory region and remains
unbound for a period of time sufficient to import enough lactose to deactivate all repressors. A simple model of this process gives a transition rate to the induced state which decays
exponentially with the inverse of the repressor concentration.
This result is borne out experimentally very precisely and over
several orders of magnitude (see Fig. 5 of [15]).
However, the reverse transition (from the induced to the
uninduced state) is still poorly understood. Our goal here is to
identify the sources of stochasticity which affect the transition
to the uninduced state and to set up a model of the lac-pathway
which incorporates only the stochastic elements relevant to
this transition. With this approach, we aim to bridge the gap
between simple models of gene regulatory networks, which
are tractable using the tools of stochastic processes and statisarXiv:2106.03928v1 [q-bio.MN] 7 Jun 2021
2
β
η
Repressor bound Repressor unbound
FIG. 1: Repressor binding and unbinding. The lac-repressor (red) binds the lac regulatory region with two of its ‘legs’ forming a DNA loop
that prevents transcription of the lac genes (center left). Without a repressor bound, the lac genes are expressed, and the pumps LacY (green)
import the inducer lactose (blue triangles). The rate of repressor binding β depends on the number of repressors present in the cell (top), the
rate of unbinding η depends on the number of inducers bound to the DNA bound repressor (bottom).
tical physics [17–24] on the one hand, and numerical simulations of detailed biochemical models on the other hand [25–
30].
We start with a detailed model of the lac-pathway to identify the key processes driving the transition to the uninduced
state. We find that several sources of stochasticity jointly drive
the transition, namely repressor-operator binding/unbinding,
inducer-repressor binding/unbinding, and fluctuations in the
total number of repressors (ordered in decreasing contribution
to the transition). Based on these processes and the timescales
they operate on, we construct a minimal model of the transition from the induced to the uninduced state of the lacpathway and compare the results with simulations and experimental observations. We find that the transition to the uninduced state is well described by a model of two-dimensional
diffusion across a barrier, and describe how the parameters of
the diffusion model emerge from the detailed dynamics of lacrepressor binding and unbinding. Three techniques turn out to
be useful in this context; ‘smoothing’ a stochastic trajectory
to identify the key fluctuations in a transition [15], generating Fokker-Planck equations to approximate discrete stochastic processes [17], and exactly solving the master equation for
suitable subsystems of a complex model to derive effective
rates.
Materials and methods
The lac pathway is formed by the lac genes lacY, lacZ, and
lacA, which are under joint regulatory control, thus forming
a so-called operon. In the induced state of the lac-pathway,
lactose (‘inducer’) is imported across the cell membrane by
the LacY protein (‘pumps’) and metabolized by the enzyme
LacZ into glucose and galactose. Allolactose, a lactose variant originating from LacZ activity, binds to the repressor of
the lac genes and drastically reduces the affinity of the lacrepressor to its DNA binding sites [6, 14]. The lac repressor
is formed by a dimer of LacI dimers which are expressed constitutively. The reduced affinity causes the repressor to unbind
from the lac regulatory region, enabling the transcription of
the lac genes and production of the Lac proteins and further
import of lactose. In the uninduced state on the other hand,
LacI frequently binds to two DNA sites in the regulatory region of the lac-operon and forms a DNA-repressor loop that
effectively blocks transcription of the lac-genes and thus the
import of lactose into the cell. For a graphical representation,
see Fig. 1.
A detailed mechanistic model of the lac-pathway. Our
model describes the transcription and translation of mRNA
and protein, both of LacY proteins (lactose importer or
‘pumps’) and of LacI proteins (repressors), repressor binding
to DNA at its binding sites, DNA looping, the uptake of lactose (inducer) or its analog into a cell, and the passive diffusion of inducers into the cell. For details, see SI Section 1
3
and [15]. Almost all rates of these processes are taken from
the experimental literature (see SI Table I). The exceptions are
the Michaelis constant of inducer import by LacY, which we
use to calibrate our model against the experimental measurements of switching rates from the uninduced to the induced
state presented in [15], and some of the dissociation rates of
DNA and repressors, which we determine using the principle
of detailed balance (see SI Section 1.1 and [15] for details).
So although the number of parameters of the model is large,
none of the parameters are fitted to data on the transition to
the uninduced state.
We performed stochastic simulations of the detailed mechanistic model using the Gillespie algorithm [31]. To measure
the mean first passage time (MFPT) from the induced to the
uninduced state at a given external inducer concentration, previously induced cells (approximately 104 pump proteins at
time t = 0) are simulated with that inducer concentration until the pump protein number crosses a target corresponding to
the uninduced state (O(100)).
To pinpoint the relevant fluctuations affecting this transition, we used a smoothing procedure introduced in [15]. This
procedure reduces the amplitude of fluctuations of a particular
component in the pathway, allowing the identification of those
fluctuations which influence the rate of transitions to the uninduced state. The smoothing is based on decreasing the step
size of a particular reaction, while simultaneously increasing
its rate by the same factor (‘one tenth of a molecule produced
at ten times the rate’). This leaves the mean number of a particular molecule unaffected, but reduces the variance, see [15].
Experimental determination of transition rates to the
uninduced state. We used the E. coli strain CH458 which
has a green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene cassette inserted
just after the lac-genes. Since the GFP gene is co-located with
the lac-genes, the number of GFP and lac-proteins in the cell
are correlated. High levels of fluorescence indicate cells in the
induced state, while uninduced cells have low levels of fluorescence.
We used TMG, a non-metabolizable analog of lactose as
an inducer. We exposed populations of previously induced
cells to different concentrations of the inducer and used flow
cytometry to determine the fraction of cells that had switched
to the uninduced state at a particular later time. Fitted to an
exponential decay, measurements at different times yield the
transition rate from the induced to the uninduced state at a
given concentration of inducer (see SI Section 2 and [15] for
details).
Results
In numerical simulations of our mechanistic model, we
applied the smoothing procedure to all constituents of the
lac-pathway and their binding states in turn. We found
that repressor-operator binding/unbinding, inducer-repressor
binding/unbinding, and fluctuations in the total number of repressors all affect the rate of transitions to the uninduced state.
Thus, several processes taking place on different timescales
are involved in the transition. On the other hand, fluctuations
in pump numbers due to translation bursts do not significantly
affect the transition rate.
These results are compatible with the following picture of
the transition to the uninduced state: The transition to the
uninduced state occurs when the copy number of pumps becomes sufficiently low. This happens as the result of a series
of prolonged periods when the lac-genes are transcriptionally
inactive, interspersed with shortened periods when the lacgenes are transcribed [17, 18, 22]. Fluctuations to high numbers of repressors lead to fast repressor binding and shorten
the transcriptionally active periods. The length of inactive periods, on the other hand, is determined by the rate of repressor
unbinding. Repressor unbinding is itself a multi-step process,
since the repressor can bind the regulatory region at two sites
simultaneously, and its affinity to these sites changes with the
number of inducers bound to the repressor. Fluctuations in the
number of inducers bound to a repressor thus affect how long
it takes for this repressor to unbind from the regulatory region.
Based on this picture, we propose a minimal quantitative
model of the transition to the uninduced state: On timescales
which are long compared to the the time intervals between
binding/unbinding of repressors, but short compared to the
mean first passage time, the number of pumps is described
as a diffusive process [17]. Drift and diffusion of this process are affected by the rate of repressor binding and repressor
unbinding. In the following sections, we discuss this diffusion approximation for the pump copy number, calculate the
repressor unbinding rate and how it depends on the inducer
concentration, describe the fluctuations in the number of repressors in terms of a second diffusive process. Putting these
elements together leads to a Fokker–Planck equation in two
variables, which describes the stochastic dynamics of pump
and repressor numbers. We calculate the mean-first passage
time from the induced state to the uninduced state under this
Fokker–Planck equation and compare the results to simulations of the full mechanistic model as well as single-cell experiments.
Production of pump proteins. We start with a master equation for protein production with repressors binding and unbinding from the operator at rates β and η respectively [17].
This is a standard model of gene regulation; later we will add
the dependencies of β and η on repressor numbers and inducer
numbers which are specific to the lac pathway. p
0
Y
(t) denotes
the probability that the lac-genes are transcriptionally inactive
(the operator is bound by a repressor, a state denoted 0), and
there are Y pump proteins in the cell, while p
1
Y
(t) denotes the
probability that the lac-genes are transcriptionally active (the
operator is free of a repressor; state 1) and there are Y pump
proteins in the cell. The production rates of the pumps when
repressor is bound and unbound from operator are denoted by
¯ξ and ξ, respectively (see SI Table. I), while the rate at which
the pump number is reduced through degradation and cell division is denoted by ϕ. The master equation of this process
4
is
dp0
Y
dt = −

Y ϕ + ¯ξ + η

p
0
Y + (Y + 1)ϕp0
Y +1 + ¯ξp0
Y −1 + βp1
Y
(1)
dp1
Y
dt = − (Y ϕ + ξ + β) p
1
Y + (Y + 1)ϕp1
Y +1 + ξp1
Y −1 + ηp0
Y
.
(2)
To derive a Fokker–Planck equation corresponding to this system of equations, we follow the standard route outlined in
[17]. Writing the Taylor series of a function as f(Y + a) =
e
a∂Y f(Y ), equations (1-2) can be written in terms of the shift
operator e
∂Y and the probability densities p
0
Y
and p
1
Y
. For
fast switching between the operator binding states (compared
to the timescales on which the pump numbers change), a quasi
steady-state develops between the two operator states. This allows combining the two equations (1-2) into a single one for
the time evolution of ρ(Y ) = p
0
Y + p
1
Y
. Restriction to second
order terms in the expansion of the shift operator e
∂Y (the diffusion approximation) gives the Fokker-Planck equation for
pump protein dynamics
∂tρ(Y ) = −∂Y AY ρ(Y ) + 1
2
∂Y
2BY ρ(Y ) , (3)
where the drift and diffusion terms are given by
AY = ϕ(hY i − Y ) (4)
BY =
ϕ(hY i + Y )
hY i
+
2ηβ
(η + β)
3
(ξ − ¯ξ)
2
(5)
and hY i is the mean number of proteins (see SI Table. I). In
Fig. 2, we compare the theoretical drift and diffusion given
by equations (4-5) with drift and diffusion determined from
simulations of our mechanistic model. Crucially, the parameters of this diffusion process depend on the rate of repressor
binding β, and on the rate of repressor unbinding η, to which
we now turn.
Unbinding of the repressor. The unbinding of the repressor
LacI from the regulatory region of the lac-operon is a composite event for two reasons: First, the repressor consists of two
‘legs’, both of which need to unbind from their binding sites.
Second, the unbinding rate of each leg depends on the number of inducers bound to the repressor, and that number can
change even while the repressor is bound to the lac-operon.
Each lac repressor can bind up to 4 inducer molecules (one
per LacI protein, four of which make a single repressor) and
the repressor-operator affinity decreases with each successive
inducer bound to the repressor. For instance, a repressor with
two inducers bound to it will dissociate from one operator site
at the rate of 811/min (see SI Table I), while a repressor with
no inducers bound to it has a much lower dissociation rate of
2.4/min[13].
The repressor-operator system can thus be characterized by
the number of inducers bound to a repressor, and the number
of legs bound to the regulatory region. These configurations
are shown in Fig. 3, along with the transitions between them.
FIG. 2: Protein drift and diffusion. With repressor numbers held
constant, protein dynamics can be approximated by a univariate
Fokker–Planck equation, Eq. (3). In the top panel, we plot the
drift for pump proteins in simulations of our detailed mechanistic
model of the lac operon (at an external inducer concentration of
15µM where the system is still bistable) along with the theoretical
drift term from our calculations, Eq. (4) (without any parameter fitting). We observe a very good match between the detailed mechanistic model and the results of (4). The points of zero drift, Y
ON and
Y
OFF, represent the stable points of the induced and uninduced states
respectively, while Y
C
is the separatrix between them. In the panel
below, we plot the diffusion from simulations of our detailed mechanistic model along with the theoretical diffusion term from Eq. (5).
The agreement is good at intermediate and high pump copy numbers,
while at low pump copy numbers some discrepancy arises.
Unfortunately, not all rates of repressor binding and unbinding
in the presence of different numbers of inducers have been
measured experimentally (to the best of our knowledge). We
use the detailed balance condition to infer some of these rates,
see SI Section 1.1 for details.
To compute the effective rate η of the unbinding of a
repressor-DNA loop (see Fig. 3), we first compute the dissociation rate {ηj} of a repressor with a constant number j
of inducers bound to it (SI Section 4). Then we introduce effective rates at which inducers bind to and unbind from that
repressor, see Fig. 3. The network of stochastic transitions in
Fig. 3 yields a set of linear equations (6–10) for the residence
times {τj} of a repressor on DNA, given that the repressor initially has j inducers bound to it, see SI Section 4 for details.
These equations ar
5
0 1 2 3 4
ˆb0I
d
3
4
ˆb1I
2d
1
2
ˆb2I
3d
1
4
ˆb3I
4d
η0 η1 η2 η3 η4
rˆ0β rˆ1β rˆ2β rˆ3β rˆ4β
FIG. 3: Repressor unbinding. The repressor unbinding rate depends on the number of inducers bound to the repressor, which changes over
time. From left to right, 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4 inducers are bound to the repressor, with the changes in the number of inducers are indicated by
horizontal arrows. The effective rates of inducer binding to the inducer-DNA system are given by ˆbj and the dissociation rate for a single
inducer is given by d (see SI Table I and SI Section 4.2 for details). The two legs of the repressor can unbind individually (diagonal arrows
in each subplot). When both legs have unbound, the repressor dissociates from the regulatory region. The “exit rate” at which this happens,
starting from a given initial number of inducers bound to the repressor, is calculated in SI Section 4.
τ0 −
η0

η0 + ˆb0I
2 −
ˆb0I
η0 + ˆb0I

1
η0 + ˆb0I
+ τ1

= 0 (6)
τ1 −
η1

η1 + d +
3
4
ˆb1I
2 −
d
η1 + d +
3
4
ˆb1I

1
η1 + d +
3
4
ˆb1I
+ τ0
!
−
3
4
ˆb1I
η1 + d +
3
4
ˆb1I

1
η1 + d +
3
4
ˆb1I
+ τ2
!
= 0 (7)
τ2 −
η2

η2 + 2d +
1
2
ˆb2I
2 −
2d
η2 + 2d +
1
2
ˆb2I

1
η2 + 2d +
1
2
ˆb2I
+ τ1
!
−
1
2
ˆb2I
η2 + 2d +
1
2
ˆb2I

1
η2 + 2d +
1
2
ˆb2I
+ τ3
!
= 0 (8)
τ3 −
η3

η3 + 3d +
1
4
ˆb3I
2 −
3d
η3 + 3d +
1
4
ˆb3I

1
η3 + 3d +
1
4
ˆb3I
+ τ2
!
−
1
4
ˆb3I
η3 + 3d +
1
4
ˆb3I

1
η3 + 3d +
1
4
ˆb3I
+ τ4
!
= 0 (9)
τ4 −
η4

η4 + 4d
2 −
4d
η4 + 4d

1
η4 + 4d
+ τ3

= 0, (10)
where ˆbj are the effective rates of inducer binding to the
inducer-DNA system and d is the dissociation rate for a single
inducer.
We compute the effective residence time of a repressor on
DNA 1
η
by averaging the {τj} obtained by solving equations
(6–10), over the probabilities that a repressor-DNA loop has
j inducers bound to it. These probabilities {rˆj} of a DNArepressor loop being formed with j bound inducers can be
calculated given the relative number of repressors and inducers in the cell and the fact that inducer binding and unbindin
6
is fast compared to the timescale over which the number of repressors change (see SI Section 4.4). The effective unbinding
rate η is then given by
η =


X
4
j=0
rˆj τj


−1
. (11)
In Eqn. (11), the residence times {τj} and the probabilities
{rˆj} are functions of the number of inducers in the cell, which
in turn is a function of number of pump proteins and external
inducer concentration. At a fixed number of pumps, an equilibrium between inducer import and inducer dilution through
cell growth is established. The mean number of inducers I
can then be written as a function of pump number Y (see SI
Table. I)
I(Y ) = m
ϕ
E
Eh + E
Y , (12)
where ϕ is the dilution rate, m is the rate of inducer import
per pump, Eh is the Michaelis constant which we use as a
fitting parameter, and E is external TMG concentration. To
the best of our knowledge, measurements of the quantities m
and Eh are not available for TMG, the lactose analog used
in our experiments [15]. From equation 12 it is clear that assumptions about the value of m will strongly affect the fitting
value for Eh. In our mechanistic model, we use the value
of m reported in [32] by Smirnova et. al for the sugar NPG
(1260/min). We determine the Michaelis constant Eh by fitting simulations of the detailed mechanistic model to experimental data on the switching from the uninduced to the induced state from [15] (the reverse transition to the one considered here, see SI Section 3 for details). The best fit was
obtained for Eh = 1.05 × 105µM. For comparison, values of the Michaelis constants Eh for lactulose transport by
LacY (2.4 × 102µM), and sucrose (6.7 × 103µM), fructose
(3.5 × 104µM) transport by CscB are reported by Sugihara
et. al in [33]. Since there are significant variations between
different sugars, the fitted value of Eh for TMG is not implausible, however it is sensitive to other parameters of the
model for which TMG-specific measurements are not available. Specifically, for large values of Eh, equation 12 depends
on m and Eh only through their ratio. The value obtained for
Eh might thus reflect simply a value of the parameter m that
is not correct for the inducer TMG used here. However, while
Eh  100µM the ratio of m and Eh will be independent of
inaccuracies in the value of m.
Equations (11) and (12) jointly establish a relationship between the number of pumps and the repressor dissociation
rate. This is an effective rate, which results from inducers
repeatedly binding/unbinding from repressors and influencing the residence time of repressors on the regulatory region.
Equations (11) and (12) quantify the amount of feedback in
the lac-pathway: The more pumps there are, the faster the lacrepressor will unbind from the regulatory region, enabling the
FIG. 4: Rate of repressor dissociation from the operator. This
figure shows the rate of repressor dissociation from the regulatory
region at different copy numbers of the pumps. Pump numbers affect
the dissociation rate via the number of inducers, as an inducer-bound
repressor dissociates quickly from the regulatory region. Blue circles
show the dissociation rate under the detailed mechanistic model, the
green line shows the results of equations (11) and (12) without any
parameter fitting.
production of further pumps. In Fig. 4 we compare the results
from Eqns. (11) and (12) for the effective dissociation rate to
the rate at which repressors unbind from the regulatory region
in simulations of the detailed mechanistic model and find very
good agreement. This effective repressor dissociation rate will
be used below as the rate at which the lac operon turns from
the transcriptionally inactive to the active state, which enters
the diffusion model of the pump numbers.
Repressor binding. The second quantity entering the diffusion model of the pump numbers is the rate β at which the
regulatory region is bound by a repressor. This rate is proportional to the number of repressors in the cell, the rate g
at which repressors can find their binding site on DNA (see
SI Table I for details) and the rate at which these repressors
can form a repressor-DNA loop, which in turn depends on the
numbers of inducers bound to the repressor. The binding rate
β is a function of the inducer numbers inside the cell via the
fractions of free repressors in the cell with j inducers bound
to them {rj}
β = gRX
4
j=0
rj
c
c + w4−j
, (13)
where R denotes the number of repressors in the cell, c is the
rate at which a repressor with one leg bound to DNA forms the
repressor-DNA loop. w4−j denotes the rate at which a repres-
7
sor with j bound inducers detaches one leg from its binding
site on DNA (see SI Table I). The quantity R
P4
j=0 rj
c
c+w4−j
can be interpreted as the effective number of repressors in the
cell.
Repressor number fluctuations. While the lacI gene is
expressed constitutively, fluctuations in the number of lacImRNA lead to fluctuations in the number of repressors. Since
the transcription rate c
R of the lacI gene is much smaller than
the mRNA degradation rate φ (see SI Table. I), we assume
that there is at most one mRNAI molecule in the cell. This
approximation enables setting up a Fokker–Planck equation
for the repressor number using a procedure identical to that
used earlier to derive Eq. (3). The resulting drift and diffusion
of the repressor numbers R are
AR = s
c
Rl
R
φ
− Rϕ, (14)
BR = s
c
R

l
R
2
φ2
+ Rϕ + s
2
2c
Rφ

l
R
2
(cR + φ)
3
, (15)
where φ is the total rate of mRNA dilution and degradation,
while c
R and l
R are the transcription and translation rates for
the LacI protein (see SI Table. I). The factor s = 1/4 reflects
the fact that repressors consist of 4 LacI proteins each. Figure 5 compares the distribution of repressor numbers resulting from (14-15) to the distribution observed in simulations
of our detailed mechanistic model and finds good agreement
between them.
Setting up the diffusion model. Drift and diffusion of the
pump numbers given by equations (4) and (5) depend on the
repressor unbinding rate η and the binding rate β. The unbinding rate depends on the pump copy number via equations (11)
and (12), and the binding rate fluctuates along with the number of repressors given by equations (14) and (15). Putting
these results together gives a bivariate Fokker–Planck equation that describes the joint time evolution of protein numbers
Y and repressor numbers R,
∂tρ(Y, R) = −∂Y AY ρ(Y, R) + 1
2
∂Y
2BY ρ(Y, R) − ∂RARρ(Y, R) + 1
2
∂R
2BRρ(Y, R). (16)
Mean first passage times from the induced to the uninduced state.
Starting in the induced state, with pump number Y set equal
to Y
ON = 104
, the transition to the uninduced state occurs
when the number of pump proteins reaches the vicinity of
the zero-drift point defining the uninduced state Y
OFF, with
O(100) pump proteins. In the absence of repressor fluctuations, the dynamics of the number of pump protein can be described by the univariate Fokker–Planck equation Eq. (3). The
values of the protein numbers where the drift Eq. (4) equals
zero, Y
ON and Y
OFF, are the stable fixed points of the Fokker–
Planck equation in the noiseless (deterministic) limit. In the
presence of noise, they correspond to the long-lived induced
and uninduced states respectively, while Y
C
corresponds to
the separatrix between them (the unstable fixed point, see Figure 2). Such a visualization of the stationary points in terms
of zeros of a closed-form drift function is not possible for dynamics of pump proteins in the presence of repressor fluctuations. In this case, the dynamics of the system is described by
the two-dimensional Fokker–Plank equation (16). The mean
first passage (MFP) time Γ from one stable fixed point
Y
ON
to another
Y
OFF
can still be calculated based on the backward Fokker–Planck equation [17, 34]
−1 = AY ∂Y Γ + 1
2
BY ∂Y
2Γ +AR∂RΓ + 1
2
BR∂R
2Γ , (17)
subject to the boundary conditions
Γ(Y
OFF) = 0, (18)
dΓ
dt



Y ON
= 0 . (19)
These boundary conditions state that mean first passage time
is 0 when the dynamics starts already at the destination Y
OFF
,
while near the induced state Y
ON, the first passage time is insensitive to small perturbations in the starting point. Inducer
numbers in the cell at start and end points do not affect the
first passage time since they quickly reach the steady state determined by the number of pump proteins given by Eq. (12).
To determine the mean first passage time, we solve the
backward Fokker–Planck equation (17) numerically. Fig. 6
shows the results as a function of the external inducer concentration. We compare the first passage times to the uninduced state obtained from Eq.(17) to simulations of the detailed mechanistic model and find a good match between the
diffusion model and the detailed mechanistic model. We find
that the mean first passage time increases exponentially with
external inducer concentration once the induced state is viable. As a result, for concentrations larger than approximately
10µM, the induced state is extraordinarily stable, with meanfirst passage times exceeding 109 minutes. The induced state
can thus persist over many generations, and is actually transmitted more stably to subsequent generations than genetic information: A generation time of 60 min implies a transi
8
FIG. 5: Distribution of repressor numbers. Repressor number fluctuate since the lacI-gene is expressed at such low levels that typically
there are none or one copy of lacI-mRNA in the cell. Green lines
show the probability distribution function from the diffusion model
defined by drift (14) and diffusion (15), blue circles give the corresponding quantities observed in the detailed mechanistic model.
rate to the uninduced state of O(10−7
) per generation, compared to a point mutation rate of O(10−6
) per generation. A
similar situation has been found in the dormant state of the
λ-phage [4].
On the other hand, at external inducer concentrations below
5µM, there is no long-lived induced state, as the lactose that
can be imported at such low external concentrations is not sufficient to deactivate all repressors and sustain an induced state.
Thus, even if initial pump numbers are large, they quickly decay and the cells collectively transition to the uninduced state.
This dynamics has been called a ‘ballistic transition’ [11].
Fluctuations in the number of repressors contribute in different ways to the transition to the uninduced state. Performing simulations of the detailed mechanistic model at constant
number of repressors (with repressor number equal to their
mean R = 10 under the full model), increases the mean
first passage time significantly at high inducer concentrations.
Higher-than-average repressor numbers lead to long periods
where the lac-genes are transcriptionally silenced, making it
easier for the pump number to reach lower levels, which can
effectively lower the barrier to be crossed by diffusion.
Comparison with experiments. Due to the long mean-firstpassage time, the transition to the uninduced state is challenging to observe experimentally. Specifically, the rapid increase
of the MFPT with external inducer concentration means that
the transition can only be observed in a narrow window where
the induced state is stable but the MFPT is shorter than time
scale over which the experiment is performed. The experiments were performed as described in [15]. We found the inFIG. 6: Mean first passage times. The mean first passage time starting from the induced state with Y
ON pumps to the uninduced state
with Y
OFF pumps is plotted against the external inducer concentration. The results from the minimal diffusion model (17) agree very
well with simulations of the detailed mechanistic model (blue circles and green line, respectively). We also show the results from the
detailed mechanistic model when repressor numbers are kept constant (red dashed line). Neglecting repressor fluctuations slows down
the transition at high inducer concentrations. The super-exponential
growth of mean first passage times with external TMG concentration is consistent with observations from our experiments (inset).
The transition can only be observed at a concentrations of 5µm and
7.5µM (estimated MFTP of 117 minutes and 920 minutes respectively, see SI Section 2) due to the the first passage times for concentrations above 10µM being too high to be observable in our experiments. The duration of our experiments gives a lower bound of
O(109
) minutes for the mean first passage time (see main text). This
lower bound is indicated by the rectangle in the top right of the inset.
duced state to be unstable at TMG concentrations below 5µM,
and observed a ‘ballistic collapse’ of the entire cell population
to the uninduced state. At concentrations greater than 10µM,
we did not observe any transitions over 8 hours in a population
of approximately 106
cells, implying that the mean first passage time is greater than 2×109 minutes (see Fig 6 inset). On
the other hand, at an intermediate concentration of 7.5µM, we
did observe transitions to the uninduced state occurring at a
rate of 1.08 × 10−3/min. This behavior qualitatively matches
the numerical simulations. For a quantitative comparison far
higher population sizes of cells would be needed to observe
more transitions to the uninduced state even when the MFPT
is large.
DISCUSSION
In this paper we have identified the fluctuations that drive
the transition to the uninduced state of the lac pathway of
E. coli. The repressor-operator binding/unbinding, inducerrepressor binding/unbinding, and fluctuations in the total
number of repressors all contribute to the stochastic transition
between these two states. To make this system tractable, we
compute effective rates of repressor binding and dissociation
from DNA as functions of pump numbers, and use these in