Neurological Consequences of COVID-19 Infection
Jiabin Tang
1 2
, Shivani Patel1
, Steve Gentleman
1
, Paul M. Matthews
1 2
1 Department of Brain Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK
2 UK Dementia Research Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK
To whom correspondence should be addressed:
Paul M. Matthews, MD PhD
E502, 5th Floor, Burlington Danes, Hammersmith Campus, Department of Brain
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK
Tel: 0207 594 2855; Email: p.matthews@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
COVID-19 infections have well described systemic manifestations, especially
respiratory problems. There are currently no specific treatments or vaccines against
the current strain. With higher case numbers, a range of neurological symptoms are
becoming apparent. The mechanisms responsible for these are not well defined, other than those related to hypoxia and microthrombi. We speculate that sustained
systemic immune activation seen with SARS-CoV-2 may also cause secondary
autoimmune activation in the CNS. Patients with chronic neurological diseases
may be at higher risk because of chronic secondary respiratory disease and
potentially poor nutritional status. Here, we review the impact of COVID-19 on
people with chronic neurological diseases and potential mechanisms. We believe
special attention to protecting people with neurodegenerative disease is warranted. We are concerned about a possible delayed “pandemic” in the form of an increased
burden of neurodegenerative disease after acceleration of pathology by systemic
COVID-19 infections. Keywords: Infectious Diseases, Neurobiology, Alzheimer’s Disease, Neuroimmunology, COVID-19.
Introduction
Over the past few months, the world has been transformed by the highly infectious
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) - the third recorded global coronavirus
(CoV) outbreak. Initially reported in Wuhan, China, COVID-19 has rapidly spread
across the entire world.1 2 Previously, the related severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) virus began in China in 2003, followed by Middle East respiratory
syndrome (MERS) that started in Saudi Arabia in 2012.1 SARS-CoV and MERS- CoV originated from bats that infected civet cats and camels, respectively, with
human transmission thereafter. Likewise, SARS-CoV-2, responsible for COVID- 19, is also thought to originate from bats, although the intermediate host has yet to
be determined. Snakes or pangolins may be potential intermediate hosts.3 4
On February 11, 2020, WHO classified the current virus as SARS-CoV-2,5 due to
its high homology to SARS-CoV, and the associated disease was named COVID- 19.6 Three major risk factors have been identified: sex (male), age (≥60 years), and
underlying health conditions (especially pneumonia, asthma, diabetes and heart
disease).3 7 COVID-19 has a lower severity and mortality rate than SARS, but it is
much more contagious.3
CNS disorders that are secondary to infection by viral agents (e.g., encephalitis
lethargica) are well described.8 In some cases, direct viral infection of cells in the
CNS occurs, e.g. herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) causing herpes simplex
encephalitis (HSE).9 Currently, it is unknown whether there are long-term
neurological complications with COVID-19. Nonetheless, such incidences in past
pandemics should be considered to promote awareness of possible unexpected
SARS-CoV-2 consequences in the CNS. Coronaviruses – An Old Enemy
Coronaviruses (CoVs) are large enveloped positive-stranded RNA viruses that
induce enteric and respiratory diseases in animals and humans.10 There are 6 CoV
members that cause human disease: SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-229E.6 CoVs normally infect the upper
respiratory tract in humans, with one strain causing symptoms of the common cold. They can also infect the lower respiratory tract in susceptible individuals, such as
newborns, infants, the elderly and those who are immunocompromised or with
underlying health conditions, leading to pneumonia, asthma exacerbation, respiratory distress syndrome, SARS or MERS.11 12
CoVs can be divided into four groups, or genera: (1) alpha-CoVs, (2) beta-CoVs, (3) gamma-CoVs, and (4) delta-CoVs. Alpha- and beta-CoVs infect humans.13 14
Like its SARS-CoV homolog, SARS-CoV-2 is also a member of the beta-CoV
genus.3
Replication and survival of the virus, is dependent on its ability to bind and ‘hijack’ host cell machinery, and mimics the behaviour of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.15
SARS-CoV-2 enters cells by binding to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
receptor, which is highly expressed in the epithelial cells of respiratory and
gastrointestinal tract, as well as heart, kidney and bladder.16-18 Infection is initiated
when the envelope spike glycoprotein on the SARS-CoV-2 plasma membrane
binds to host cellular receptors, ACE2, which leads to fusion of membranes and
entry of the virion into the host cell via endocytosis. The viral RNA genome is then
released into the cytoplasm, enabling replication of the viral genome and synthesis
of glycoproteins and nucleocapsid proteins for the envelope. The latter components
are packaged into virion-containing vesicles, which are released subsequently into
the extracellular environment via exocytosis, enabling infection propagation in the
host (Figure 1).19
Figure 1. Potential underlying mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 ‘hijacking’ host cell
machinery. SARS-CoV-2 binds to ACE2 receptor and enters the cell via endocytosis. Then, the viral RNAs are released to cytoplasm, undergoing replication and promoting glycoprotein
synthesis. Finally, the new SARS-CoV-2 virus will be released to the extracellular
environment by exocytosis. ACE2, angiotensin converting enzyme 2. Potential Consequences of CoV Infection for the Brain
Due to misdirected host immune responses, respiratory viruses can harm the CNS
via autoimmunity.20 Human CoVs have a similar molecular structure and mode of
replication as animal CoVs, such as porcine hemagglutinating encephalitis virus
(PHEV), feline coronavirus (FCoV), and mouse hepatitis virus (MHV).21-23 CoVs
thus are well recognized as being able to invade the CNS and cause viral
encephalitis, infectious toxic encephalopathy or acute cerebrovascular disease.24 25
A CoV-induced encephalomyelitis mouse model was established several years ago, indicating that CoV is able to cause progressive demyelinating neurodegenerative
disease.26 Another study with mouse models has also shown persistence of HCoV- OC43 RNA even one year post-infection in the CNS after intracerebral inoculation. The mice had abnormal reflexes and reduced activity in an open field test, as well
as atrophy and neuronal loss in the hippocampus.27 HCoV-229E and HCoV- OC43,28-30 as well as SARS-CoV31 32 are all neuroinvasive and neurotropic in
humans. This has been confirmed by the presence of coronaviral RNA in the
human brain, demonstrating that these respiratory pathogens contribute to
neurovirulence.30 33
On 4th March, 2020, gene sequencing confirmed the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of a 56-year-old patient in Beijing Ditan Hospital. The patient was diagnosed with viral encephalitis, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2
could potentially invade the CNS, rather than just acting secondary to a systemic
immune response.34 This was the first piece of evidence for direct nervous system
invasion by SARS-CoV-2. Subsequently, SARS-CoV-2 has also been observed in
neural and capillary endothelial cells in frontal lobe tissue at post-mortem
examination.35
Neurological impairments resulting from SARS-CoV-2 infection include anosmia, ageusia, encephalopathy, prominent agitation, confusion and corticospinal tract
signs, as reported in a study where 84% (49/58) of patients experienced these
abnormalities.36 37 Severe infection has also resulted in stroke in some patients.38 39
Evidence is building that SARS-CoV-2 can enter the brain through (1)
hematogenous dissemination - secondary inflammatory activation or ischemia
secondary to a systemic coagulopathy, (2) neuronal retrograde dissemination - neuronal infection in the periphery and subsequent use of neural transport
machinery (Figure 2).2 40
Potential routes of hematogenous dissemination of SARS-CoV-2 may start with
virus entry into the human airways and trans-epithelial entry of the virus into the
bloodstream. Monocytes can become activated as a direct virus response and
release factors such as MMP9 to increase blood brain barrier (BBB) permeability, as well as pro-inflammatory factors such as TNF-α to upregulate ICAM-1
expression on endothelial cells. This eases the passage of infected and activated
monocytes into the CNS,41 and SARS-CoV-2 is then able to pass through the
loosened BBB.6 Infiltrated infected monocytes activate microglia that produce
chemokines (CCL5, CXCL10, CXCL11) and induce chemoattraction of activated
T cells or other monocytes. In the meantime, astrocytes may produce other
chemokines (CCL2, CCL5 and CXCL12) to aid the recruitment of more infected
leukocytes, ultimately initiating a neuroinflammatory loop to cause immune-
mediated neuropathology and a systemic inflammatory storm.11 Hence, systemic
inflammation with prolonged hypoxia induces persistent and uncontrolled
neuroinflammation, which may underlie clinical manifestations present in patients
recovering from pneumonia, including cognitive impairment, behavioural changes
and delirium due to cortical deficits,6 as well as deficits in attention and memory
due to hippocampal damage.6 42
Figure 2. Potential entry routes of SARS-CoV-2 invading the brain. (A) Via
hematogenous dissemination. SARS-CoV-2 could activate monocytes, increasing MMP9 and
TNF-α level, and therefore increase the permeability of blood brain barrier (BBB). (B) Via
neuronal retrograde dissemination. SARS-CoV-2 can go through olfactory mucosa and enter
the brain directly via olfactory bulb and olfactory nerve. (B) is reproduced from 43
.
For the neuronal retrograde dissemination method, nasal entry allows viral
migration through the neuroepithelium of the olfactory mucosa to the mitral cells, and olfactory bulb thereafter.44 Subsequently, SARS-CoV-2 may disseminate to
the hippocampus and other brain regions via olfactory nerves
11 45 or via synaptic
transmission.46 SARS-CoV-2 is also likely to affect the brainstem heavily
47 48
in a
similar manner to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV,49 since neural and glial ACE2
expression is prevalent in the brainstem, especially in areas that regulate
cardiovascular function.50 51 Many studies have claimed that the SARS-CoVs
seems to have neurotoxicity effects with the interaction of ACE2 in the medullary
brainstem,52 and could induce neurodegeneration, neuroinflammation and
astrogliosis.53 54 The presence of anosmia and ageusia in SARS-CoV-2 infected
subjects may also support the hypothesis of nasal route entry of the virus.37 55
However, Bostanciklioğlu M. argued against it, claiming the glial-lymphatic
pathway containing olfactory lymphatic vessels as a direct entry route for SARS- CoV-2 to the brain, which is intriguing and worthwhile for further investigation.56
Some scientists are aiming to inhibit ACE2 interaction to treat COVID-19, and
ACE2-transgenic mice as well as non-human primates are being developed.57
However, studies have shown that lung injury can be worsened upon decreased
ACE2 expression levels,58 and the overexpression of ACE2 in neuron cells could
protect the brain from ischemic stroke,59 60 so ACE2 inhibitors should be used with
caution. A recently published study using human recombinant soluble ACE2
turned out to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection successfully in both human blood
vessel organoids and human kidney organoids,61 which could be a promising
therapeutic direction. COVID-19 in Patients with Neurodegenerative Diseases
Greater number of co-morbidities and the increased neurodegenerative prevalence
with age may mean that patients with neurodegenerative diseases are at greater risk
of COVID-19. Patients with advanced Parkinson’s Disease (PD) could be
particularly vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2, due to rigidity of respiratory muscles, impairment of cough reflex and pre-existing dyspnea.62 Optimal neurological care
has also been compromised due to the pandemic and strain on health care
systems.63 Previously, antibodies against CoVs have been detected in the CSF of
PD patients,64 suggesting that virions could penetrate the blood brain barrier and
potentially contribute to the progression of PD.62 Dopaminergic neurons
abundantly express ACE2 on their membranes. Hence, infiltration of SARS-CoV-2
may exacerbate PD-related symptoms. In addition, with more than 50 million people having dementia, a risk of double hit
of dementia and COVID-19 could further exacerbate the quality of life for
patients.65 Currently, there is limited data of COVID-19 patients with dementia, but
these patients have been reported to be at increased risk for COVID-19 compared
to patients without dementia.66 There are two possible mechanisms that could
initiate potential AD development after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Firstly, viral
infection into CNS could directly cause neuroinflammation, and theoretically
induce microglia and astrocyte activation, as well as disruption of proteostasis
(amyloid production and tau phosphorylation).67 68 Secondly, infiltration of various
peripheral cytokines (IL-10, IL-1β, IFN-γ, TNF-α) into the CNS after SARS-CoV- 2 incubation also may lead to neuroinflammation and even encephalitis (Figure
3).69-71 Numerous viruses have been reported to be closely related to the risk of AD
within cohort studies, including herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1), human
herpesvirus 6 (HHV6) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), although there is still evidence
disputing this.68 72 73 According to incomplete retrospective statistics, 5% to 6%
severe COVID-19 patients have been described to have cerebrovascular
complications, 27% with brain insults, and 36% - 91% with neurologic disorders.38
74-76 Besides, discoveries have also shown probable relationship between AD genes
and increased COVID-19 mortality, and secondary effects of other organ system
failure or side-effects of sedatives could also put the patients at exacerbated risk for
AD.77 78
During the SARS and MERS pandemics, evidence has shown the neurotropism of
CoV,53 54 79 and the viral infection has been reported to contribute to the
pathophysiology of brain disorders like encephalopathy, dementia, neuropathy and
psychosis.80 81 Because of the nature of chronic diseases, the symptoms may appear
years after patients have recovered from viral infection, which makes it easy to
overlook the connection. Patients with diabetes, which is one of the major
comorbidities for COVID-19, appear to predispose to AD as well according to
genetic etiologies.82 In COVID-19 patients, various CNS symptoms have already
been reported, such as headache, consciousness alteration and epilepsy, while brain
imaging also showed ischemic infarct, hemorrhage and acute encephalopathy.83 84
Moreover, the rate of CNS disorders is concordant with the respiratory problem
status.38 Interestingly, memantine, a common drug for AD, appears to have
antiviral potential against SARS-CoV-2,85
indicating the connection of underlying
mechanisms between COVID-19 and AD. Memantine, an N-Methyl-D-aspartic
acid (NMDA) receptor inhibitor, appears to be a good option for clinical studies, since it could inhibit glutamate release, which is a putative neurotoxic effect of
depleted ACE2 (Figure 4).85 86 Memantine has already been reported to be
effective against CoV in 2004.87 In addition, corticosteroid administration has
shown progressive clinical improvement in a SARS-CoV-2 infected encephalitis
patient, suggesting another possible therapeutic direction.88
Figure 3. Potential underlying mechanisms that SARS-CoV-2 initiates AD development. SARS-CoV-2 could induce the activation of astrocytes and microglia directly, and could also
promote the release or infiltration of peripheral cytokines (IL-10, IL-1β, IFN-γ, TNF-α), therefore leading to glial activation. CNS homeostasis could then be disrupted, accelerating
Aβ deposition and tau phosphorylation, which are the hallmarks of AD progression.

Figure 4. Potential underlying mechanisms of memantine against SARS-CoV-2. (A) In
normal condition, ACE2 is supposed to function as an inhibitor for glutamate release, preventing glutamate over-release in healthy people. (B) SARS-CoV-2 could bind to ACE2
receptor and inhibit ACE2 function, leading to glutamate over-release. Glutamate will then
interact with NMDA receptor and cause neurotoxicity. (C) Memantine could bind to NMDA
receptors, acting as an antagonist to glutamate. NMDA, N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid. ACE2, angiotensin converting enzyme 2. The SARS-CoV-2 infection could disrupt the brain homeostasis, making the CNS
more vulnerable for AD progression even if asymptomatic for decades. Apart from
this, interrupted medication of current AD patients could augment
neurorehabilitation needs as well. Nevertheless, in a transgenic mouse model, apolipoprotein D, typically overexpressed in PD and AD patients, showed
resistance effects against CoV-induced neurodegeneration, which makes us think
whether the neurological disorders could protect the individual against CoV in a
certain degree.89 90
COVID-19 VS Neurodegenerative Diseases - Dilemmas and Directions
The COVID-19 pandemic has been unprecedented in the modern age because of its
high infection rate, extent and range of morbidities and, in those more vulnerable, mortality. The need for rapid, more efficient conducted research has led to new
way of working through national and international collaborative mechanistic
studies and efforts to develop therapies for management and effective vaccines. Increasing the speed of disseminating research data has been fundamental to this. Clinicians, as well as scientists, should be aware and participate in the development
of platforms such as the UK National Institute for Health Research National
Bioresource, which shares and deploys the data worldwide for neurological
disorders associated with COVID-19.91
Healthcare systems have been forced to modify medical care priorities due to the
COVID-19 pandemic in ways that have had a dramatic impact on patients with
chronic neurodegenerative conditions.92 Telemedicine has become a preferred
option to deliver urgent and ongoing healthcare.93 94 However, mental wellbeing
for patients with neurodegenerative disease is at risk from the effect of selfisolation and social distancing themselves.94 95 Physical wellbeing and resilience
may be impacted negatively by reductions in physical activity and social
interactions; mere lacking regular walking and social interactions, as well as access
to physiotherapists or fitness classes has consequences.96 In addition, many patients
and caregivers have not been willing to go to hospital since the onset of pandemic, because of the fear of in-hospital infection; data showed an approximately 50%
reduction of ‘non-essential’ brain disease admissions.97 98 The normal aging
process could also be exacerbated by SARS-CoV-2 infection, in turn leading to
higher risk of PD or AD.99 New approaches for patient management that can
accommodate changing clinical practices need to be accelerated. Emerging
software tools directed to both neurologists and patients that support the
management of chronic diseases and contribute to better mental health are amongst
these.74 100
To date, there is no specific antiviral treatment approved for COVID-19 and no
vaccination is currently available. Most hospitals are still relying on symptomatic
treatment according to the doctors ’ experience, or treatment for comorbidities. Some nonspecific therapies have been proposed based on past experience with
SARS and MERS. Clinical tests have been initiated to study the potential of
existing antiviral agents,101 102
interferons,102 103
immunotherapies,104 as well as
some Chinese medicines.105 106 Inhibitors of viral RNA polymerase include
remdesivir and favipiravir, as well as inhibitors of viral protein synthesis and
maturation include lopinavir and ritonavir.107 108 Promising emerging medicines
include a CRISPR-Cas13-based strategy - prophylactic antiviral CRISPR in human
cells (PAC-MAN) - has been reported to degrade RNA from SARS-CoV-2 and
inhibit viral replication.109 It is significant to discover if the neurological symptoms
are caused by viral entry or secondary immune response, since the treatment
scenarios could be completely different.110
Multiple vaccines are being developed, including mRNA-1273, Ad5-nCoV, INO- 4800, LV-SMENP-DC and pathogen-specific artificial antigen-presenting cell
(aAPC).111 A general concern with these efforts is the extent, rate and impact of
CoV mutations (e.g. of surface spike proteins) likely to occur over time after
prolonged CNS infection and thus the efficacy and durability of potential
protection.87 Several mutations have been reported recently for SARS-CoV-2 in
Non-Structural Protein 6 (NSP6), Open Reading Frame 10 (ORF10) adjacent
region and S1 domain,112 113 as well as changed binding capacity with ACE2.114
One specific vaccine is unlikely to be enough, even if it is highly effective in a
segment of the population. All vaccines also carry the potential for adverse effects, which means we have to be cautious in multiple ways. To sum up, attention should be focused on the relationship between COVID-19
and neurodegenerative diseases for two main reasons: (1) SARS-CoV-2 infection
may cause neuroinflammation which, in turn, may hasten the progression of some
neurodegenerative disorders; (2) as neurodegenerative patients cannot take care of
themselves, the quarantine itself may have negative consequences for the cognition
and function, potentially contributing to their vulnerability to SARS-CoV-2
infection with exposure.
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
Although the long-term consequences of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the brain are
unclear, there is enough evidence in the literature to suggest that infection may
exacerbate some CNS disorders. Resistance and resilience to any viral infection
relies on a balanced immune response, which can be dysfunctional with aging and
neurological diseases or their antecedents.115 Given the prominence of respiratory
symptoms, there is a risk for doctors to overlook consequences for the brain
pathology. As we anticipate recurrent flare of infection, neurological care - more
than ever - needs to be delivered using multi-disciplinary teams including
neurorehabilitation, nutritional and social care professionals.115 116 Characterising
and understanding long-term outcomes of SARS-CoV-2 infections and other
deleterious impacts now is a priority to be pursued through partnerships between
academia and the NHS. Acknowledgements
PMM acknowledges generous personal and research support from the Edmond J
Safra Foundation and Lily Safra and an NIHR Senior Investigator Award. This
work also is supported by the UK Dementia Research Institute, which received its
funding from UK DRI Ltd., funded by the UK Medical Research Council, Alzheimer’s Society and Alzheimer’s Research UK. Infrastructure was supported
by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre
(BRC). We also acknowledge the support from Getbodysmart website for a kind
permission to reproduce their figure. Authors' contributions: JT and SP wrote the primary draft. JT drawed all the
figures, except for the one from Getbodysmart website. PMM and SG revise