Virtual Compton scattering at low energies with a positron
beam
Barbara Pasquinia,1,2, Marc Vanderhaeghenb,3
1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy
2Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy
3Institut f¨ur Kernphysik and PRISMA+ Cluster of Excellence, Johannes Gutenberg Universit¨at, D-55099 Mainz, Germany
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract The Virtual Compton scattering (VCS) process at low energies explores the electromagnetic structure of the proton in terms of generalized polarizabilities (GPs). In the one-photon exchange approximation,
VCS can be accessed with exclusive photon production reactions with electron or positron beams. The
extraction of the GPs from VCS with electron beam
has seen substantial progress over the past two decades.
Nonetheless, a consistent picture of the GPs from low
to higher scales demands further investigations. Complementary measurements with positron beams offer an
unique possibility, and we present an impact study of
such experimental program.
Keywords Compton scattering · Polarizabilities ·
Dispersion relations
PACS 11.55.Fv · 13.40.-f · 13.60.Fz
1 Introduction
Virtual Compton scattering (VCS) off the proton refers
to the process γ
∗p → γp, where a virtual photon interacts with a proton target and a real photon is emitted
in the final state. At low energy of the outgoing real
photon, the VCS can be parametrized in terms of generalized polarizabilities (GPs) [1, 2, 3], which are a generalization of the static polarizabilities of real Compton scattering (RCS). As the GPs depend on the photon virtuality Q2
, they parametrize the local polarizability response of the nucleon to a quasi-static external electromagnetic field, describing the spatial deformation induced in the charge, magnetization and
spin densities [4]. They also enter generalizations of the
ae-mail: barbara.pasquini@unipv.it
be-mail: vandma00@uni-mainz.de
Gerasimov-Drell-Hearn sum rule [5, 6] to finite photon
virtuality, which link the GPs in model independent
ways to RCS polarizabilities, moments of inclusive nucleon structure functions, and the nucleon anomalous
magnetic moments and Pauli radii [7, 8]. Furthermore,
at low virtuality, the GPs are low-energy parameters
which enter the hadronic two-photon exchange corrections, which are required in the precision extraction of
the proton charge radius from muonic Hydrogen spectroscopy experiments [9, 10, 11, 12].
The VCS process is accessed experimentally in the
lepto-production of real photons, i.e., lp → lpγ. This reaction has been investigated with an electron beam at
energies below the pion production threshold and in the
resonance region at MAMI [13, 14, 15, 16, 17], JLab [18,
19] and MIT-Bates [20, 21]. A review of these experimental results has recently been presented in Ref. [22].
The potential of using positron beams for this reaction
has not been explored so far and in this document we
present a first impact study for the extraction of GPs
with the proposed positron facility at JLab.
2 Formalism and notation
In the l(k) + p(p) → l(k
0
) + p(p
0
) + γ(q
0
) reaction,
the final photon can be emitted either from the lepton, which corresponds to the Bethe-Heitler (BH) process, or from the proton, which is referred to as the full
virtual Compton scattering (FVCS) process. The last
one, can in turn be decomposed into a Born (B) and
non-Born (NB) part. In the Born process, the virtual
photon is absorbed on the proton and the intermediate
state remains a proton, whereas the non-Born process
contains all proton excitations and meson-loop contributions. The amplitudes of these three processes add
arXiv:2106.05683v1 [hep-ph] 10 Jun 2021
2
up coherently to form the total lp → lpγ amplitude,
i.e.
T
lp→lpγ = T
BH + T
FVCS
, with T
FVCS = T
B + T
NB.
(1)
The BH and B terms can be calculated exactly using as input only the electromagnetic form factors of
the nucleon. The NB contribution contains the protonstructure information and can be expressed with a multipole expansion in the center of mass (c.m.) frame of
the γ
∗p system. In the limit of vanishing emitted photon
energy, q
0
cm → 0, at fixed value of the three-momentum
qcm of the virtual photon (γ
∗
), the multipoles which
enter the low-energy expansion (LEX) of the NB part
are expressed in terms of GPs. The leading contribution is described by six GPs [1, 23, 24]: two scalar GPs,
i.e., the electric αE1(Q2
) and magnetic βM1(Q2
) GPs,
and four spin-dependent GPs, which are functions of
the photon virtuality Q2 ≡ −(k − k
0
)
2
. The LEX formalism provides a method to analyze VCS experiments
below pion production threshold in terms of structure
functions which depend linearly on the GPs [1, 2]. This
formalism is however poorly convergent when going to
higher energies. On the other hand, the dispersion relation (DR) formalism has proved a very appropriate and
efficient tool to analyze VCS experiments both below
and above the pion production threshold [3, 25, 26, 27,
22]. The main advantage in this case is the possibility
to extend the energy region of investigation, which allows for a larger sensitivity of the VCS observables to
the GPs. For a review of the DR formalism, we refer
to the original works [25, 26, 3] and recent reviews [27,
22], while here we only highlight its essential ingredients. In the DR approach, the VCS amplitude is decomposed in terms of 12 Lorentz invariant functions, which
can be described through unsubtracted dispersion integrals relating their real and imaginary part, at fixed
values of Q2 and of the four-momentum transferred
t = (p
0 − p)
2
, and as functions of the c.m. energy. The
high-energy behaviour of these functions guarantees the
convergence of ten out of the twelve dispersion integrals.
As long as we are interested in the energy region up
to the ∆(1232) resonance, the convergent integrals can
be saturated by πN intermediate states. In practice,
the calculation uses the MAID pion photo- and electroproduction multipoles [28, 29], which include both resonant and non-resonant production mechanisms. The
remaining two non-converging DRs are treated as finiteenergy sum rule, by cutting the dispersion integrals up
to a maximum energy value and absorbing all contributions from higher energies in asymptotic terms, which
are replaced by a finite number of energy independent
poles in the t-channel. Furthermore, in the DR model
of Refs. [25, 26], the dispersion integrals that show a
slow convergence are supplemented by an asymptotic
contribution which parametrize the residual contribution that is not accounted for by the πN intermediate
states. In conclusion, besides the well known π
0 pole
contribution, the asymptotic contributions can be described in terms of two phenomenological functions that
are related to the scalar GPs. In order to provide predictions for VCS observables, it is convenient to adopt the
following parametrizations for theses phenomenological
functions:
αE1(Q
2
) − α
πN
E1 (Q
2
) = (α
exp
E1 − α
πN
E1 )fα(Q
2
), (2)
βM1(Q
2
) − β
πN
M1 (Q
2
) = (β
exp
M1 − β
πN
M1 )fβ(Q
2
), (3)
where αE1 and βM1 are the RCS polarizabilities, with
superscripts exp and πN indicating, respectively, the
experimental value [30] and the πN contribution evaluated from unsubtracted DRs. In Eqs. (2) and (3),
fα(Q2
) and fβ(Q2
) are fit functions, with the constraints
fα(0) = fβ(0) = 1. Their functional form is unknown
and should be adjusted by a fit to the experimental
cross sections. However, in order to provide predictions
for VCS observables, it is convenient to adopt the following dipole parametrizations
fα(Q
2
) = 1
(1 + Q2/Λ2
α)
2
, fβ(Q
2
) = 1
(1 + Q2/Λ2
β
)
2
, (4)
where the Λα and Λβ are free parameters, not necessarily constant with Q2
, which can be adjusted by a fit
to the experimental cross sections.
In Fig. 1, we show the world data for the GP extractions in comparison with the DR calculation for different values of the dipole mass parameters in Eq. (4).
The experimental extractions from VCS measurements
below pion production threshold have been obtained
by applying both the LEX formalism and the DR approach. In all these analyses, the two methods give consistent results, except for the MIT-Bates measurement
in the in-plane kinematics where the LEX at leading
order was shown not to be applicable. The experimental extractions are performed separately at each Q2
value, without making any assumption on the global
Q2 dependence. Yet, the dipole Ansatz in Eq. (4) with
Λα = Λβ = 0.7 GeV reproduces well the smooth fall-off
in Q2 of the data. The only exception are the MAMI-I
and MAMI-IV data points at Q2 = 0.33 GeV2
, mainly
for the electric GP. New data from the JLab VCS experiment E12-15-001 are currently exploring the intermediate Q2
range of 0.3 − 0.77 GeV2 and are expected to
help in the understanding of this puzzling behavior [31].
Further insights could be gained by exploiting VCS
measurements with positron beams in the same kinematics. As a matter of fact, the combination of data
3
Fig. 1 World data for the electric and magnetic GPs of the proton as a function of Q2, including the RCS point [30]. Inner
(outer) error bars are statistical (total). Some points are slightly shifted for visibility. The results are from the DR calculation
for three different values of the dipole mass parameters: Λα = Λβ 0.5 GeV (red dotted curves); Λα = Λβ 0.7 GeV (black solid
curves) and Λα = Λβ 0.9 GeV (blue dashed curves).
with positron and electron beams gives access to various asymmetries that would allow us to better constrain
the scalar GPs, as discussed in detail in Sect. 3.
3 VCS asymmetries using electron and
positron beams
The kinematics of the lp → lpγ reaction are defined
by five independent variables. We will adopt the set
of variables (Elab, Q2
, W, θ, φ), with Elab the incoming
electron energy in the lab frame, W the c.m. energy of
the γ
∗p → γp subprocess, θ the polar angle (in the γ
∗p
c.m. frame) between the initial and final photon, and φ
the azimuthal angle between the leptonic and hadronic
planes. The reference plane (φ = 0o
) corresponds to the
plane spanned by both lepton directions.
The lepton beam charge (e) and polarization (λ)
dependence of the lp → lpγ differential cross section is
given by
dσe
λ = dσBH + dσVCS + λ dσ˜VCS + e (dσINT + λ dσ˜INT),
(5)
where dσ (dσ˜) are the polarization independent (dependent) contributions which are even (odd) functions of
the azimuthal angle φ. dσINT involves the real part of
the VCS amplitude that contains the GP effects, while
dσ˜INT is proportional to the imaginary part of the VCS
amplitude which does not depend on the GPs. Combining lepton beams of opposite charge and different
polarization provides a complete separation of the four
unknown INT and VCS contributions. In the following, we will discuss the kinematical conditions that have
been explored in the recent VCS measurements at JLab
using an electron beam, to assess the impact of using
complementary measurements with a positron beam.
Using unpolarized electron and positron beams, we
can construct the unpolarized beam-charge asymmetry
(BCA) AC
UU as
A
C
UU =
(dσ+
+ + dσ+
−) − (dσ−
+ + dσ−
−)
dσ+
+ + dσ+
− + dσ−
+ + dσ−
−
=
dσINT
dσBH + dσVCS
. (6)
With polarized lepton beams, we can construct the
lepton beam-spin asymmetry (BSA)
A
e
LU =
dσe
+ − dσe
−
dσe
+ + dσe
−
=
dσ˜VCS + edσ˜INT
dσBH + dσVCS + e dσINT
. (7)
One can combine the observable asymmetries AC
UU ,
A
+
LU , and A
−
LU to separate the contribution from the
dσ˜VCS and dσ˜INT terms as:
A˜VCS ≡ A
+
LU
1 + A
C
UU 
+ A
−
LU
1 − A
C
UU 
=
2dσ˜VCS
dσBH + dσVCS
, (
4
and
A˜
INT ≡ A
+
LU
1 + A
C
UU 
− A
−
LU
1 − A
C
UU 
=
2dσ˜INT
dσBH + dσVCS
. (9)
The asymmetry combination A˜VCS of Eq. (8) is proportional to the imaginary part of the interference between the VCS amplitudes with either transverse or longitudinal virtual photon polarization. In the ∆(1232)
resonance region, where the imaginary part of the transverse amplitude dominates by far over the imaginary
part of the longitudinal amplitude, this combination
then basically originates from the interference product
of the imaginary part of the transverse VCS amplitude
due to ∆(1232) excitation, and the real part of the longitudinal VCS amplitude. The latter amplitude has the
sensitivity to the GP αE1(Q2
). On the other hand, the
asymmetry combination A˜
INT of Eq. (9) is proportional
to the interference between the real BH amplitude and
the imaginary VCS amplitude. As the latter does not
depend on the GPs, it provides a cross-check of the
unitarity input in the dispersive formalism.
4 Results and discussion
In this section, we explore for a positron beam the same
kinematical range which has been measured by the E12-
15-001 experiment at JLab [31] using an electron beam.
The experiment utilized the SHMS and HMS spectrometers [32, 33] in Hall C to detect, respectively, electrons
and protons in coincidence, while the reconstructed missing mass has been used for the identification of the photon. An electron beam of energy Elab = 4.55 GeV and
a 10 cm liquid hydrogen target were employed for the
measurements.
4.1 Beam-charge asymmetry
In Fig. 2, we show the results for the charge asymmetry for in-plane kinematics as function of the photon
scattering angle (the negative and positive values correspond to φ = 180o and φ = 0o
, respectively) at two different values of the four-momentum transfer Q2
for the
center of mass energy of W = 1.17 GeV and W = 1.232
GeV. The calculations correspond to a variation of the
mass-scale parameters in the range Λα = Λβ = 0.7±0.2
GeV, which is the same range as shown along with the
GP world data on Fig. 1. One notices from Fig. 2 that
the sensitivity to the GPs is mainly at lower energies in
the forward region −60o ≤ θ ≤ 40o and it slightly increases at higher values of Q2
. In the region where the
BH process is very large, which corresponds roughly
with the angular range 70o ≤ θ ≤ 100o
in Fig. 2, one
notices that the beam-charge asymmetry becomes very
small as the cross section for the BH process by itself is
identical between electron and positron beams. In the
direction of the BH peaks the asymmetry has zeros.
The same kinematics is explored in Fig. 3 for Q2 =
0.43 GeV2 and in Fig. 4 for Q2 = 0.65 GeV2
, but for
out-of-plane angles φ. In these cases, the sensitivity to
the scalar polarizabilities is enhanced, especially at the
lower center of mass energy and higher values of momentum transfer. The largest effects are for φ = 90o at
scattering angles θ ≤ 100o
, where we observe a relative
effect on the asymmetry of up to ±30% by scaling the
mass parameters by ±0.2 units.
4.2 Beam-spin asymmetry
We study the beam-spin asymmetries for electron and
positron beams in the same out-of-plane kinematics as
in Figs. 3 and 4, for φ = 45o and φ = 90o
, both for
Q2 = 0.43 GeV2
in Fig. 5, and for Q2 = 0.65 GeV2
in
Fig. 6. One notices that these asymmetries have a large
sensitivity to the GP, which is maximal for φ = 90o and
for kinematics corresponding with the excitation of the
∆(1232) resonance. To better understand this sensitivities, we consider the observables A˜VCS and A˜
INT defined in Eqs. (8) and (9) respectively, which involve the
beam-charge asymmetry and the beam-spin asymmetries for both electron and positron beams. They allow
to separate the contributions from the dσ˜VCS and dσ˜INT
cross section contributions. We show these observables
in Fig. 7 for φ = 90o and Q2 = 0.65 GeV2
, for both
W = 1.17 GeV and W = 1.232 GeV.
We notice from Fig. 7 that the combination A˜VCS,
which mainly stems from the interference product between the imaginary part of the transverse VCS amplitude due to ∆(1232) excitation and the real part of
the longitudinal VCS amplitude, shows a large sensitivity to the GPs. This sensitivity mainly comes from the
GP αE1(Q2
). The asymmetry combination A˜VCS thus
provides an independent way to experimentally access
the electric dipole GP. Comparing the A˜VCS results for
W = 1.17 GeV and W = 1.232 GeV, we see that the
observable reaches the largest values at W = 1.232 GeV
as the imaginary part of the VCS amplitude is maximized on the ∆(1232) resonance position.
On the other hand, we also notice from Fig. 7 that
the combination A˜
INT is much less sensitive to the GPs,
especially on the ∆(1232) resonance position. This can
be understood as dσ˜INT measures the interference product between the BH amplitude and the imaginary part
of the VCS amplitude, which does not depend on the
GPs at all. The remaining GP sensitivity which one se
5
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
-0
0.1
-180 -60 60 180
A (a)
C
UU
θ (deg)
0
0.2
0.4
-180 -60 60 180
A (b)
C
UU
θ (deg)
-0.2
0
0.2
-180 -60 60 180
A (c)
C
UU
θ (deg)
0
0.2
0.4
-180 -60 60 180
A (d)
C
UU
θ (deg)
Fig. 2 The beam-charge asymmetry AC
UU as function of the photon scattering angle for in-plane kinematics, for c.m. energy
W = 1.17 GeV (panels (a) and (c)) and W = 1.232 GeV (panels (b) and (d)) at different values of the four-momentum
transfer: Q2 = 0.43 GeV2 (panels (a) and (b)) and Q2 = 0.65 GeV2 (panels (c) and (d)). The results are for Λα = Λβ = 0.5
GeV (red dotted curves), Λα = Λβ = 0.7 (black solid curves) and Λα = Λβ = 0.9 GeV (blue dashed curves).
on Fig. 7 for A˜
INT results from the denominator contribution dσVCS in Eq. (9). The observable A˜
INT provides
however a test for the unitary input in the dispersive
formalism.
5 Conclusions
In this work we have presented an impact study for
an experimental program to measure the VCS process
lp → lpγ with positron beams at Jefferson Lab. Using
a dispersive formalism to extract the generalized polarizabilities (GPs) from the VCS observables, we have
shown that the beam-charge asymmetry has a sizeable
sensitivity to the GPs in the ∆(1232) resonance region,
when going to out-of-plane kinematics. Furthermore,
by measuring the beam-spin asymmetry for a positron
beam and combining it with the corresponding measurement with an electron beam allows to define observables which separate the cross section terms resulting
from the real part of the longitudinal VCS amplitude,
which has a strong sensitivity to the electric dipole GP
αE1(Q2
), and the term proportional to the imaginary
part of the VCS amplitude, which provides a crosscheck on the unitary input in the dispersive formalism